Upon a Dark Horse
Deep in the heart of the forest, a wild-hearted girl rode upon a dark horse. Her hair was as pale as moonlight, and her eyes were the ice blue of the mountains in winter.

She had no light as the wind had stolen her lantern’s flame. Yet she galloped on fearlessly, for she knew the paths of the forest as well as the lines that criss-crossed her palm. Trees drew back their boughs to let her pass; stars realigned themselves to light her way. The girl tipped her face to the sky and howled, feral and sweet.

She was wilder than snow on a first winter’s morn. Wilder than moonlight on a midsummer’s eve. Wilder than midnight in a forest of wolves.

Her name was Wild Rose.

A little way in the distance, the River Spell gurgled like a wise witch’s laughter and Wild Rose slowed the dark horse to a canter. A wolf with mottled fur of many shades soundlessly flanked her as she weaved past ancient apple trees, through a glade of winter pines, round a huge dead ash tree, then past a tunnel of hawthorn.

Wild Rose did not even glance at the tunnel, though she caught the bewitching scent of cinnamon and sorrow that drifted from within.

Journeying on, she came to a bend where the river’s current calmed to no more than a whisper. The horse and the wolf, named Lullaby for the sweetness of her howl, both halted. Wild Rose leaned into the woodland darkness, sensing a watchful owl high above, a scuffling water rat near the river’s edge and somewhere in front a living, wicked solidness.

The Spindle Wood.

Impossible, unfathomable, impassable.

A tangled wall of briar, tall as the trees, laced with thorns as sharp as daggers. No one had ever found their way through it. Carriages and carts from the village took the royal road, which led round it. Nobody ever dared or even dreamed of going through.

Wild Rose dismounted in a smooth, light jump and turned to the stallion. First she stroked his silken mane, darker than jet and woven with ribbons. Then she whispered, with as much authority as she could summon: ‘Stay here, Luce.’

He stared at her, black and proud and beautiful. She reached out her arms to him, breathing in a scent that felt like safety.

‘I’ll be fine,’ she assured him, her heart already racing.

Turning towards the thorns, Wild Rose moved forward, a shimmer of hope tingling in her bones.

This will be the night I cross.

Over the years she had mapped and planned and schemed and dreamed that one day she would cross the Spindle Wood and dance in the castle courtyard beyond. It was a pledge she had made often. A pledge made real in dreams and promises.

First she’d had to wait for a night when the clouds were so thick the moon was all but hidden. The forest so dark that no one would notice a lone rider. Not her bright-eyed uncles and aunts, nor the Royal Guard.

Next she’d had to steal the sharpest axe, which belonged to her Uncle Tobias, from the cottage.