CHAPTER TWO
The Girl in the Blue Cloak
Not far from the edge of the forest stood a lone dark cottage. It was a thing of simple beauty, crafted from ebony and draped in curtains of ivy. It wasn’t part of the Wild Wood, but neither did it fall within the lanternlight of Silverdel village. It was a place in between; a place that harboured late-night secrets and drew curious looks from passers-by; a gateway between the safe and the wild. Even in midwinter, its garden boasted the drifting scent of lilac and camomile – as if its flowers had turned a magic trick of invisibility.

But the garden had been far from peaceful that morning. Saffy stood in the shade of the pear tree, rocking a screaming baby in a chestnut crib. She was trying to soothe her little brother so her mother Ondina could catch a wink of sleep. But both of their attempts were futile. The baby was furious about being outside, furious about the daylight and furious that Saffy was looking after him.

An ice gust danced past, dragging rough fingers through Saffy’s curls and making her laugh then shiver. She searched the sky for a sign of snow, but the morning was clear, cloudless, despite the bitter cold.

We ought to head inside, she thought, drawing herself up and lifting her brother into her arms.

Saffy had hardly taken a step when a bird fell clean from the sky, striking the earth inches from her boot. Clutching the baby in one arm, Saffy lifted the small thing in her hand. A baby raven. It was night-black and so beautiful it was unsettling.

Its pale eyes fixed upon Saffy, then closed forever. The final beat of its heart fluttered in her hands like an omen, and Saffy shivered. On delicate inspection, she found one of its wings had frozen shut. Winter was truly here.

‘Mama!’ Saffy cried, hurrying inside.

Her mother was there in a moment, taking the raven from Saffy, her face etched with a frown.

‘If ravens are dying on the wing, this winter will show no mercy,’ said Ondina. ‘Run to the village, Saffy. Get bread, buns, milk, cheese and apples from Marla.’

Even though her mother’s tone was serious, Saffy’s face twinkled with delight. She loved going to the village. Seeing this, Ondina gave her a hard look.

‘Get as much as the money will buy – you’ll have to haggle hard. I mean it, Saffy – don’t go buying buttons or lace or any such nonsense.’

Saffy nodded her head with serious concentration as her mother took the wailing baby from her and bundled Saffy into a dark blue cloak. Its hem was caked with mud, its wooden toggle worn slim by the press of many fingers.

‘Once you have all the food, I need you to go to your grandmother’s house.’

Saffy’s eyes became starry bright in amazement. ‘On my own?’ she breathed.

Living at the foot of the forest, Saffy had met many a lost traveller who had stayed in the woods too long and come stumbling to her parents’ door, shaking with fright. Some whispered of sharp-toothed wolves, others of small men and women with dagger-sharp axes; some spoke of the Witch of the Woods.

Once a man had come in, his hair wild, his face shining with wonderment. ‘There’s a phantom in this forest,’ he had proclaimed. ‘A girl who can fly and dance through the trees.’

Saffy was never afraid of these curious, story-weaving folk. Her mother refused to turn anyone away, no matter how late or early the hour, and Saffy had seen how easily a cup of nettle tea could soothe a fractious soul. She knew the light and dark of the forest.

But never had Saffy made the trip to her Grandma Eleena’s house alone.

A silence coated the cottage in the pause that followed Saffy’s question. A silence made of a million threads of motherhood that linked their two hearts. Ondina looked at her daughter and nodded. Saffy stood still, awestruck by the responsibility.

‘You remember the rules?’ asked Ondina crisply.

‘Yes,’ Saffy answered diligently.

When I see a wolf, still my heart but keep moving.

Always stay calm. The wolves won’t attack if I’m not afraid.

Never set foot in the forest without lavender – just in case.

Saffy had seen wolves many times – most of the villagers had. But Saffy had been lucky enough to be perched on her father’s shoulders as he held out lavender to them, seen how at ease they were with him, learned how to move slowly through their territory without causing alarm.

Her father had once served at the castle. There was no better huntsman in all the land, yet he never harmed the wolves. On many occasions, when Saffy had taken her father his lunch on the cusp of the Wild Wood, she’d spotted a wolf and softly walked by it. But always with pockets stuffed with lavender.

‘You need to leave by mid-morning. Go straight through the Wild Wood, don’t stray from the path and stay at Grandma Eleena’s till Papa comes to get you,’ said Ondina, kissing Saffy’s forehead while the baby crossly squirmed.

Saffy dashed to the village, vaulting lightly over the gate that marked the beginning of the village, the empty basket swinging on her arm.

The path that led through Silverdel was cobblestone and Saffy stomped her way along it, the navy cloak dragging on the ground, catching on loose stones and making her trip. She wished she could discard the bothersome cloak, but the air was freezing. Folk bustled round her in buttoned-up coats and dark wool scarves, crinkling their eyes into smiles when they saw her. Saffy beamed back.

A little goat butted Saffy’s legs and she giggled, gently pushing the hungry creature away. Then a flash of deep violet caught her eye and Saffy stopped quite still.

Most of the folk of Silverdel were dressed in the colours of autumn. Deep greens, fading yellows and soft nut browns, with a hint of orange if you were lucky, or a rare peacock feather tucked in a cap. But here was a girl in a cloak the hue of midnight tulips.

Saffy gasped. She had never seen anything so glorious in all her twelve years. Who could it possibly belong to? Then she realized – she should have known. There was only one person who might own such a garment: Verity Silkthread.